h1. Configuration parameters

Configure your Play application by setting values for configuration keys in @conf/application.conf@ file. See also:

* "Main concepts - the conf directory":main#conf
* "Managing application.conf in several environments":ids
* "Put your application in production":production

h2(#application). Application configuration


h3(#application.baseUrl). application.baseUrl

The application base URL used for reverse-resolving absolute URLs. This is used by the <code>@@{..}</code> template syntax and in Jobs, which do not have an inbound @Http.Request@), such as rendering e-mail. For example, for @dev@ mode:

bc. application.baseUrl=http://localhost:9000/

For @prod@ mode:

bc. %production.application.baseUrl=http://www.yourdomain.com/


h3(#application.defaultCookieDomain). application.defaultCookieDomain

Enables session/cookie sharing between subdomains. For example, to make cookies valid for all domains ending with ‘.example.com’, e.g. @foo.example.com@ and @bar.example.com@:

bc. application.defaultCookieDomain=.example.com

Default: a cookie is only valid for a specific domain.


h3(#application.forceSecureReverseRoutes). application.forceSecureReverseRoutes

Forces all reverse routes and controller action redirection to be secure (https). This is useful for SSL-enabled apps to prevent insecure (http) url generation when redirecting to another action from inside your controllers, or when using the <code>@{..}</code> template syntax. For example:

bc. application.forceSecureReverseRoutes=true

Default: @false@


h3(#application.lang.cookie). application.lang.cookie

The name of the cookie that is used to store the current language, set by @play.i18n.Lang.change(String locale)@, which you can change if you want separate language settings for separate Play applications. For example:

bc. application.lang.cookie=MYAPP_LANG

Default: @PLAY_LANG@


h3(#application.langs). application.langs

Defines locales used by your application. You can then place localised messages in @conf/messages.{locale}@ files. The value is a comma-separated list of language codes, for example:

bc. application.langs=fr,en,ja

Default: no additional languages.


h3(#application.log). application.log

Specifies log level for your application. For example:

bc. application.log=DEBUG

Default: @INFO@

See also: "Logging configuration":logs.


h3(#application.log.path). application.log.path

Path to a Log4J configuration file, to customise log output. If you do not specify a path, Play will load a @log4j.properties@ file in the @conf@ directory if present.

bc. application.log.path=/log4j.properties

Default: @/log4j.xml@ falling back to @/log4j.properties@


h3(#application.log.recordCaller). application.log.recordCaller

Configures the value of @play.Logger.recordCaller@ to record and display the caller method. For example:

bc. application.log.recordCaller=true

Default: @false@


h3(#application.mode). application.mode

Application mode (case insensitive). For example:

bc. application.mode=prod

Values:

* @DEV@ - enable instant reloading and other development help
* @PROD@ - pre-compiles and caches Java sources and templates.

Default: @DEV@


h3(#application.name). application.name

The application’s name, usually set by the @play new@ command.

Default: no value.


h3(#application.secret). application.secret

The secret key is used to secure cryptographic functions, usually set by the @play new@ or @play secret@ command. If you deploy your application to several instances be sure to use the same key. For example:

bc. application.secret=mNuAvlsFVjeuynN4IWZxZzFOHYVagafzjruHmWTL26VISKr46rUtyGcJuX7aYx4q

If not set, @play.libs.Crypto.sign@ will not encrypt messages; in particular, sessions will not be encrypted.

Default: no value.


h3(#application.session.cookie). application.session.cookie

Session cookie name. The cookies are not secured by default, only set it to true if you’re serving your pages through HTTPS. For example:

bc. application.session.cookie=PLAY

Default: sessions are written to the transient @PLAY_SESSION@ cookie.


h3(#application.session.storeClass). application.session.storeClass

Session storage implementation. By default Play! stores session in cookie. 
It can be overridden with this setting. For example:

bc. application.session.storeClass=com.company.CacheSessionStore

Default: sessions are stored in cookie (see `play.mvc.CookieSessionStore` for implementation)


h3(#application.session.httpOnly). application.session.httpOnly

Enables the ‘HTTP only’ flag on cookies, which mitigates some XSS attacks. For example:

bc. application.session.httpOnly=true

Default: @false@

For more information see the "OWASP page on HttpOnly":http://www.owasp.org/index.php/HttpOnly.


h3(#application.session.maxAge). application.session.maxAge

Session time-out, i.e. the maximum age of the session cookie. If not set, the session expires when you close your web browser. For example, to set the session to one hour:

bc. application.session.maxAge=1h

Remember the session for one week:

bc. application.session.maxAge=7d

Default: the session is based on a transient cookie expires when the browser is closed.


h3(#application.session.secure). application.session.secure

Enables Cookie-based sessions for HTTPS connections. For example:

bc. application.session.secure=true

Default: @false@


h3(#application.session.sendOnlyIfChanged). application.session.sendOnlyIfChanged

Avoid sending the session cookie if there were no changes to the session. For example:

bc. application.session.sendOnlyIfChanged=true

Default: @false@


h3(#application.web_encoding). application.web_encoding

The text encoding that Play uses when communicating with the web browser and for the "Web Service client":libs#WebServiceclient. You do not normally need to set this, since Play defaults to using @UTF-8@. For example:

bc. application.web_encoding=ISO-8859-1

Default: @UTF-8@

Changing @application.web_encoding@ affects the @charset@ part of the @Content-type@ HTTP header. It also affects which encoding is used when transmitting rendered dynamic results, but it **does not** affect the bytes sent when Play serves static content: So, if you have modified the default response encoding and you have static text-files (in the @public/@ folder) that contain special characters, you must make sure that these files are stored according to the specified encoding. All other files should be stored in UTF-8.


h2(#attachments). Attachments


h3(#attachments.path). attachments.path

Storage path for @play.db.jpa.Blob@ content. This can be an absolute path, or a relative path to a folder inside the Play application folder. For example:

bc. attachments.path=data/attachments

Default: @attachments@


h2(#certificate). X509 certificates


h3(#certificate.key.file). certificate.key.file

Specifies an X509 certificate key, for HTTPS support. The file must be named @host.key@. For example:

bc. certificate.key.file=/certificates/host.key

Default: @conf/host.key@


h3(#certificate.file). certificate.file

Specifies an X509 certificate file, for HTTPS support. The file must be named @host.cert@. For example:

bc. certificate.file=/certificates/host.cert

Default: @conf/host.cert@


h3(#certificate.password). certificate.password

Password for a password-protected X509 certificate key file, for use with the "certificate.key.file":#certificate.key.file configuration. For example:

bc. certificate.password=secret

Default: @secret@


h2(#cron). Scheduled jobs

You can configure cron expressions for scheduled jobs as configuration keys that start with @cron.@ and use the key as the value of a <code>@play.jobs.On</code> or <code>@Every</code> annotation. For example, <code>@On("cron.noon")</code> refers to:

bc. cron.noon=0 0 12 * * ?


h2(#date). Date formats


h3(#date.format). date.format

Sets the default date format, using a @java.text.SimpleDateFormat@ pattern. For example:

bc. date.format=dd-MM-yyyy

This property also affects how @${date.format()}@ renders dates in templates. It also set the default date format when binding a date parameter.

Default: @yyyy-MM-dd@

You can also set a different date format for specific languages that you have configured with "application.langs":#application.langs, for example:

bc. date.format.fr=dd-MM-yyyy


h2(#dbconf). Databases configuration (Single-DB or multi-DB)

You can configure Play to use a single or multiple (separate) databases.

h3. Support for multiple databases

You can specify a specific database or the default configuration. 
All these parameters can be used to configure a specific database by replacing @db@ by @db.[DB_name]@ where @[DB_name]@ is the name of the database.

The default database is configured by configuration parameters in conf/application.conf whose keys start with ‘db.’ (e.g: db.url). 
To configure an additional database, add a dot and a suffix (name of the database) to the ‘db’ part of the key, like this:

Example:

@db@ will be replaced by @db.[DB_name]@ where @[DB_name]@ is the name of the database
@jpa@ will be replaced by @jpa.[DB_name]@ where @[DB_name]@ is the name of the database
@hibernate@ will be replaced by @hibernate.[DB_name]@ where @[DB_name]@ is the name of the database

This database configuration is now called 'DB_name' in Play. For example, configure DB/JPA/hibernate for this 'DB_name' configuration like this:

Example, with 3 tables "default", "student" and "teacher"

bc. db.default.[param]
db.student.[param]
db.teacher.[param]

You can then access this database from your application’s Java by using this name like this:

bc. EntityManager em = JPA.em("student");


h3(#db). db

Database engine configuration. To quickly set up a development database use a transient in memory database (H2 in memory):

bc. db=mem

For a simple file written database (H2 file stored):

bc. db=fs

For a local MySQL5 database:

bc. db=mysql:user:pwd@database_name

To reuse an existing Datasource from your application server:

bc. db=java:/comp/env/jdbc/myDatasource@

And for application server where Datasource doesn't have @java:@ prefix (Glassfish and its derivative), you could use @jndi:@ instead. The @jndi:@ prefix will be omitted:

bc. db=jndi:jdbc/myDataSource

If you specify a @Datasource@, the database plugin detects the pattern @db=java:@ and @db=jndi:@ and will de-activate the default JDBC system.

Default: none.


h3(#db.destroyMethod). db.destroyMethod

A generic ‘destroy’ method name. When using an existing Datasource, this is sometimes needed to destroy it when the application is stopped. For example:

bc. db.destroyMethod=close

Default: none.


h3(#db.factory). db.factory

Factory class that will create DataSource instances.

bc. db.factory=play.db.hikaricp.HikariDataSourceFactory

Currently two values are supported out-of-the-box: 
* play.db.hikaricp.HikariDataSourceFactory   (default starting from Play 1.5)
* play.db.c3p0.C3P0DataSourceFactory         (it was the only data source available prior to Play 1.5)

Default:

* @play.db.hikaricp.HikariDataSourceFactory@

h3(#db.driver). db.driver

Database driver class name, for use with "db.url":#db.url. For example:

bc. db.driver=org.postgresql.Driver

Default:

* @org.h2.Driver@ when "db":#db is set to @mem@ or @fs@, or if "db.url":#db.url  starts with @jdbc:h2:mem:@
* @com.mysql.jdbc.Driver@ if "db":#db is a @mysql:…@ configuration.

h3(#db.isolation). db.isolation

Database transaction isolation level. For example:

bc. db.isolation=SERIALIZABLE

Valid values are @NONE@, @READ_UNCOMMITTED@, @READ_COMMITTED@, @REPEATABLE_READ@, @SERIALIZABLE@, or an integer value to be passed to @java.sql.Connection.setTransactionIsolation()@. Note that not all databases support all transaction isolation levels.

Default: database dependent, usually @READ_COMMITTED@

h3(#db.pass). db.pass

Database connection password, used with "db.url":#db.url.

Default: no value, or an empty string when "db":#db is set to @mem@ or @fs@. 

h3(#db.pool.acquireIncrement). db.pool.acquireIncrement

Determines how many connections at a time c3p0 will try to acquire when the pool is exhausted.

Default: @3@ 

h3(#db.pool.acquireRetryAttempts). db.pool.acquireRetryAttempts

Defines how many times c3p0 will try to acquire a new Connection from the database before giving up. If this value is less than or equal to zero, c3p0 will keep trying to fetch a Connection indefinitely.

Default: @10@

h3(#db.pool.acquireRetryDelay). db.pool.acquireRetryDelay

Milliseconds, time c3p0 will wait between acquire attempts. 

Default: @1000@

h3(#db.pool.breakAfterAcquireFailure). db.pool.breakAfterAcquireFailure

If true, a pooled DataSource will declare itself broken and be permanently closed if a Connection cannot be obtained from the database after making acquireRetryAttempts to acquire one. If false, failure to obtain a Connection will cause all Threads waiting for the pool to acquire a Connection to throw an Exception, but the DataSource will remain valid, and will attempt to acquire again following a call to getConnection(). 

Default: @false@

h3(#db.pool.unreturnedConnectionTimeout). db.pool.unreturnedConnectionTimeout

Seconds. If set, if an application checks out but then fails to check-in [i.e. close()] a Connection within the specified period of time, the pool will unceremoniously destroy() the Connection. This permits applications with occasional Connection leaks to survive, rather than eventually exhausting the Connection pool. And that's a shame. Zero means no timeout, applications are expected to close() their own Connections. Obviously, if a non-zero value is set, it should be to a value longer than any Connection should reasonably be checked-out. Otherwise, the pool will occasionally kill Connections in active use, which is bad.
 
Use this temporarily in combination with debugUnreturnedConnectionStackTraces to figure out where Connections are being checked-out that don't make it back into the pool!

Default: @0@

h3(#db.pool.debugUnreturnedConnectionStackTraces). db.pool.debugUnreturnedConnectionStackTraces

f true, and if unreturnedConnectionTimeout is set to a positive value, then the pool will capture the stack trace (via an Exception) of all Connection checkouts, and the stack traces will be printed when unreturned checked-out Connections timeout. This is intended to debug applications with Connection leaks, that is applications that occasionally fail to return Connections, leading to pool growth, and eventually exhaustion (when the pool hits maxPoolSize with all Connections checked-out and lost). This parameter should only be set while debugging, as capturing the stack trace will slow down every Connection check-out. 

Default: @false@

h3(#db.pool.testConnectionOnCheckout). db.pool.testConnectionOnCheckout

If true, an operation will be performed at every connection checkout to verify that the connection is valid. Be sure to set an efficient preferredTestQuery or automaticTestTable if you set this to true. Performing the (expensive) default Connection test on every client checkout will harm client performance. Testing Connections in checkout is the simplest and most reliable form of Connection testing, but for better performance, consider verifying connections periodically using idleConnectionTestPeriod. 

Default: @false@

h3(#db.pool.testConnectionOnCheckin). db.pool.testConnectionOnCheckin

If true, an operation will be performed asynchronously at every connection checkin to verify that the connection is valid. Use in combination with idleConnectionTestPeriod for quite reliable, always asynchronous Connection testing. Also, setting an automaticTestTable or preferredTestQuery will usually speed up all connection tests. 

Default: @true@

h3(#db.pool.maxConnectionAge). db.pool.maxConnectionAge

Seconds, effectively a time to live. A Connection older than maxConnectionAge will be destroyed and purged from the pool. This differs from maxIdleTime in that it refers to absolute age. Even a Connection which has not been much idle will be purged from the pool if it exceeds maxConnectionAge. Zero means no maximum absolute age is enforced.
     
Default: @0@

h3(#db.pool.maxIdleTime). db.pool.maxIdleTime

Seconds a Connection can remain pooled but unused before being discarded. Zero means idle connections never expire.

Default: @0@

h3(#db.pool.idleConnectionTestPeriod). db.pool.idleConnectionTestPeriod

If this is a number greater than 0, c3p0 will test all idle, pooled but unchecked-out connections, every this number of seconds.

Default: @10@

h3(#db.pool.maxIdleTimeExcessConnections). db.pool.maxIdleTimeExcessConnections

The number of seconds before idle connections beyond "db.pool.minSize":#db.pool.minSize are ‘culled’. See the "c3p0 documentation":http://www.mchange.com/projects/c3p0/#maxIdleTimeExcessConnections.

Default: @0@ - ‘no enforcement’.


h3(#db.pool.maxSize). db.pool.maxSize

Connection pool maximum size (number of connections). See the "c3p0 documentation":http://www.mchange.com/projects/c3p0/#maxPoolSize. For example:

bc. db.pool.maxSize=60

Default: @30@


h3(#db.pool.minSize). db.pool.minSize

Connection pool minimum size (number of connections). See the "c3p0 documentation":http://www.mchange.com/projects/c3p0/#minPoolSize. For example:

bc. db.pool.minSize=10

Default: @1@

h3(#db.pool.initialSize). db.pool.initialSize

Number of Connections a pool will try to acquire upon startup. Should be between minPoolSize and maxPoolSize. See the "c3p0 documentation":http://www.mchange.com/projects/c3p0/#initialPoolSize. For example:

bc. db.pool.initialSize=5

Default: @1@


h3(#db.pool.timeout). db.pool.timeout

Connection pool time-out in milliseconds. See the "c3p0 documentation":http://www.mchange.com/projects/c3p0/#checkoutTimeout. For example:

bc. db.pool.timeout=10000

Default: @5000@

h3(#db.pool.loginTimeout). db.pool.loginTimeout

Sets the maximum time in seconds that this data source will wait while attempting to connect to a database.
     
Default: @0@

h3(#db.pool.maxStatements). db.pool.maxStatements

The size of c3p0's global PreparedStatement cache. If both maxStatements and maxStatementsPerConnection are zero, statement caching will not be enabled.
     
Default: @0@

h3(#db.pool.maxStatementsPerConnection). db.pool.maxStatementsPerConnection

The number of PreparedStatements c3p0 will cache for a single pooled Connection. If both maxStatements and maxStatementsPerConnection are zero, statement caching will not be enabled.
     
Default: @0@


h3(#db.url). db.url

A full JDBC configuration, in combination with "db.user":#db.user, "db.pass":#db.pass and "db.driver":#db.driver. For example:

bc. db.url=jdbc:postgresql:database_name

Default: none.


h3(#db.user). db.user

Database connection user name, used with "db.url":#db.url.

Default: none, or @sa@ when "db":#db is set to @mem@ or @fs@. 

h3(#db.testquery). db.testquery

Override query to use when keepalive connection polling is being performed. The default value will cause keepalive to fetch metadata. This means it does a getTables() which can be a heavy operation on a busy databse. 

Default: null  
Default on MySQL: /* ping */ SELECT 1

h3(#db.pool.maxAdministrativeTaskTime). db.pool.maxAdministrativeTaskTime

Seconds before c3p0's thread pool will try to interrupt an apparently hung task. Rarely useful.  

Default: @0@

h3(#db.pool.numHelperThreads). db.pool.numHelperThreads

c3p0 is very asynchronous. Slow JDBC operations are generally performed by helper threads that don't hold contended locks. Spreading these operations over multiple threads can significantly improve performance by allowing multiple operations to be performed simultaneously.  

Default: @3@


h3(#db.pool.connectionInitSql). db.pool.connectionInitSql

Sets the SQL string that will be executed on all new connections when they are created, before they are added to the pool (HikariCP only).

Default: none

h2(#evolutions). Database evolutions


h3(#evolutions.enabled). evolutions.enabled

Used to disable "database evolutions":evolutions.

bc. evolutions.enabled=false

Default: @true@



h3(#modules.evolutions.enabled). modules.evolutions.enabled

Used to disable "database evolutions":evolutions from all modules

bc. modules.evolutions.enabled=false

Default: @true@

h3(#[module name].evolutions.enabled). [module name].evolutions.enabled

Used to disable "database evolutions":evolutions from a given module

bc. [module name].evolutions.enabled=false

Default: @true@

h3(#evolution.PLAY_EVOLUTIONS.textType). evolution.PLAY_EVOLUTIONS.textType

If you are having problems with the default datatype text (clob for Oracle), you can specify your own datatype 

bc. evolution.PLAY_EVOLUTIONS.textType=clob

Default: @clob@

h2(#test). Test runner

h3(#headlessBrowser). headlessBrowser

Specifies the web browser compatibility mode for the HtmlUnit headless web browser used when running @play auto-test@.

bc. headlessBrowser=FIREFOX_38

Values:

* @CHROME@
* @FIREFOX_31@
* @INTERNET_EXPLORER_8@
* @INTERNET_EXPLORER_11@
* @EDGE@

Default: @FIREFOX_38@

h3(#webclient.timeout). webclient.timeout

Specifies the timeout of the WebConnection. Set to zero for an infinite wait.

Note: The timeout is used twice. The first is for making the socket connection, the second is for data retrieval. If the time is critical you must allow for twice the time specified here.

bc. webclient.timeout=60

This value can be set directly in the command @play auto-test@ by adding @--timeout=60@


h2(#hibernate). Hibernate

You can specify additional Hibernate properties. For example, to enable SQL comments:

bc. hibernate.use_sql_comments=true


h3(#hibernate.connection.datasource). hibernate.connection.datasource

Hibernate datasource configuration.


h2(#http). Server configuration


h3(#http.address). http.address

HTTP listener address, to restrict addresses the server listens on. For example:

bc. http.address=127.0.0.1

Default: the server listens for HTTP on the wildcard address.


h3(#http.cacheControl). http.cacheControl

HTTP Response headers control for static files: sets the default max-age in seconds, telling the user’s browser how long it should cache the page. This is only read in @prod@ mode, in @dev@ mode the cache is disabled. For example, to send @no-cache@:

bc. http.cacheControl=0

Default: @3600@ - set cache expiry to one hour.


h3(#http.allowed.method.override). http.allowed.method.override

Define allowed methods that will be handled when defined in X-HTTP-Method-Override

bc. http.allowed.method.override=POST

Default: none


h3(#http.exposePlayServer). http.exposePlayServer

Disable the HTTP response header that identifies the HTTP server as Play. For example:

bc. http.exposePlayServer=false

Default: @true@


h3(#http.path). http.path

The URL path where the application runs on the server: use this if you do not host your Play application at the root of the domain you’re serving it from. This parameter has no effect when deployed as a WAR, because the path will be handled by the application server. For example:

bc. http.path=/myapp/

Default: @/@


h3(#http.port). http.port

The port that the HTTP server listens on.

Default: @9000@


h3(#http.proxyHost). http.proxyHost

Proxy server for web services requests. For example:

bc. http.proxyHost=localhost

Default: @http.proxyHost@ system property.


h3(#http.proxyPassword). http.proxyPassword

Proxy password for web services requests.

Default: @http.proxyPassword@ system property.


h3(#http.proxyPort). http.proxyPort

Proxy port for web services requests. For example:

bc. http.proxyPort=3128

Default: @http.proxyPort@ system property.


h3(#http.proxyUser). http.proxyUser

Proxy user for web services requests.

Default: @http.proxyUser@ system property.


h3(#http.nonProxyHosts). http.nonProxyHosts

Indicates the hosts which should be connected to directly and not through the proxy server.
The value can be a list of hosts, each seperated by a @|@, and in addition a wildcard character @*@ can be used for matching.

For example:

bc. http.nonProxyHosts=localhost|*.example.com

Default: @http.nonProxyHosts@ system property.



h3(#http.useETag). http.useETag

If enabled, Play will generate entity tags automatically and send a 304 when needed. For example, to deactivate use of entity tags:

bc. http.useETag=false

Default: @true@


h3(#http.userAgent). http.userAgent

Custom @USER_AGENT@ header value for web services requests. For example:

bc. http.userAgent=myApp 1.0

Default: none.


h3(#https.port). https.port

Enables an HTTPS connector, listening on the specified port. For example:

bc. https.port=9443

Default: none - no HTTPS configuration.


h2(#java). Java source


h3(#java.source). java.source

Java source level, which overrides the @java.version@ system property. For example:

bc. java.source=1.8

Values:  @1.7@ (No longer supported since 1.5.0), @1.8@, @9@, @10@.

Default: @1.8@


h2(#jpa). JPA

You can configure Play to use a single or multiple (separate) databases.

h3. Support for multiple databases

You can specify a specific database or the default configuration. 
All these parameters can be used to configure a specific database by replacing @db@ by @db.[DB_name]@ where @[DB_name]@ is the name of the database.

The default database is configured by configuration parameters in conf/application.conf whose keys start with ‘jpa.’ (e.g: db.url). 
To configure an additional database, add a dot and a suffix (name of the database) to the ‘jpa’ part of the key, like this:

Example:

@jpa@ will be replaced by @jpa.[DB_name]@ where @[DB_name]@ is the name of the database

This database configuration is now called 'DB_name' in Play. For example, configure JPA for this 'DB_name' configuration like this:

Example, with 3 tables "default", "student" and "teacher"

bc. jpa.default.[param]
jpa.student.[param]
jpa.teacher.[param]

You can then access this database from your application’s Java by using this name like this:

bc. EntityManager em = JPA.em("student");

h3(#jpa.dialect). jpa.dialect

Specify the custom JPA dialect to use here. For example:

bc. jpa.dialect=org.hibernate.dialect.PostgreSQLDialect

Default: Play will guess the dialect based on the "db.driver":#db.driver configuration.


h3(#jpa.ddl). jpa.ddl

Specify the DDL generation pattern to use. For example, to enable automatic database structure updates. For example:

bc. jpa.ddl=create-drop

Default: @update@ (@dev@ mode) or @none@ (@prod@ mode).


h3(#jpa.debugSQL). jpa.debugSQL

Debug SQL statements (logged using DEBUG level). For example:

bc. jpa.debugSQL=true

Default: @false@


h3(#jpa.entities). jpa.entities

Comma-separated list of names of additional JPA entity classes to load. This is useful when you have additional entities that are not in the @models@ package, such as model classes in a separate JAR. For example:

bc. org.example.model.Person, org.example.model.Organisation

Default: none.


h3(#jpa.mapping-file). jpa.mapping-file

JPA mapping file.

Default: none.


h2(#jpda). JVM


h3(#jpda.port). jpda.port

Defines which port is used by JPDA when application is in debug mode. For example:

Default: @8000@


h2(#keystore). keystore


h3(#keystore.algorithm). keystore.algorithm

A JDK Security API standard algorithm name, for use with the "keystore.file":#keystore.file configuration.

bc. keystore.algorithm=pkcs12

Values - ‘standard names’ from the JDK Security API:

* @jceks@ (‘SunJCE’ provider)
* @jks@ (‘SUN" provider)
* @pkcs12@

Default: @JKS@


h3(#keystore.file). keystore.file

Specifies a keystore certificate, for HTTPS support. The file should be named @certificate.jks@. For example:

bc. keystore.file=conf/certificate.jks


h3(#keystore.password). keystore.password

Keystore configuration, for use with the "keystore.file":#keystore.file configuration.

bc. keystore.password=secret

Default: @secret@


h2(#memcachedconfig). Memcached


h3(#memcached). memcached

Enable "Memcached":http://www.danga.com/memcached/; if you don’t configure Memcached, Play will use a standalone cache that stores data in the JVM heap.

bc. memcached=enabled

Default: @disabled@

See also: "using a cache":cache.


h3(#memcached.host). memcached.host

Specify memcached host. For example:

bc. memcached.host=127.0.0.1:11211

Default: @127.0.0.1:11211@

You can specify multiple hosts to build a distributed cache. For example:

bc. memcached.1.host=127.0.0.1:11211
memcached.2.host=127.0.0.1:11212


h2(#mimetype). Custom MIME types

You can declare additional MIME types. For example:

bc. mimetype.xpi=application/x-xpinstall


h2(#webserviceconfig). Web services

h3(#webservice). webservice

Class name of the Web services implementation, or one of the built-in implementations. For example:

bc. webservice=urlfetch

Values:

* @urlfetch@ - the JDK’s internal implementation
* @async@ - the engine is Async Http Client
* class name of a @play.libs.WS.WSImpl@ implementation

Default: @async@ - the engine is Async Http Client.


h2(#mail). Mail


h3(#mail.debug). mail.debug

Enables SMTP transaction logging; under the hood, Play uses JavaMail to perform the actual SMTP transactions.

bc. mail.debug=true

Default: @false@


h3(#mail.smtp). mail.smtp

Simple mail configuration key.

Default: @mock@ - use a mock Mailer

See also: "SMTP configuration":emails#smtp.


h3(#mail.smtp.authenticator). mail.smtp.authenticator

Class name for a custom SMTP authenticator (@javax.mail.Authenticator@) implementation.

Default: none.


h3(#mail.smtp.channel). mail.smtp.channel

There are two ways to send the e-mail over an encrypted channel, which you can choose with this configuration property. Values:

* @clear@ - no encryption
* @ssl@ - SMTP-over-SSL (SMTPS) connector; an SSL socket listening on port 465
* @starttls@ - a clear connection on port 25 that will switch to SSL/TLS, if your server supports the @starttls@ command (see: "RFC 2487":http://www.apps.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2487.html).

Default: @clear@


h3(#mail.smtp.host). mail.smtp.host

Outgoing mail server. For example:

bc. mail.smtp.host=127.0.0.1

To use a GMail SMTP server:

bc. mail.smtp.host=smtp.gmail.com

Default: @localhost@


h3(#mail.smtp.localhost). mail.smtp.localhost

Local host name override for SMTP commands.

Default: none - use the Java Mail default.


h3(#mail.smtp.pass). mail.smtp.pass

SMTP server password, used with "mail.smtp.host":#mail.smtp.host, e.g. a GMail password.

Default: none.


h3(#mail.smtp.port). mail.smtp.port

Port for SMTP server connections, used to override the defaults. For example:

bc. mail.smtp.port=2500

Default:

* @25@ when "mail.smtp.channel":#mail.smtp.channel is set to @clear@ or @starttls@
* @465@ when "mail.smtp.channel":#mail.smtp.channel is set to @ssl@


h3(#mail.smtp.protocol). mail.smtp.protocol

Sets whether to use SSL. Values:

* @smtp@
* @smtps@

Default: @smtp@



h3(#mail.smtp.socketFactory.class). mail.smtp.socketFactory.class

When using SSL connections with JavaMail, the default SSL behaviour is to drop the connection if the remote server certificate is not signed by a root certificate. This is the case in particular when using a self-signed certificate. Play’s default behaviour is to skip that check. You can control this using this property.


h3(#mail.smtp.user). mail.smtp.user

SMTP server user name, used with "mail.smtp.host":#mail.smtp.host, e.g. a GMail user name.

Default: none.


h2(#play). Play run-time


h3(#play.plugins.descriptor). play.plugins.descriptor

File(s) to load play plugins from.
* If given, play with load plugins ONLY from this file. @since play 1.5
  * May contain multiple filenames (separated by comma). @since play 1.5.1
* If not given, play will find ALL files "play.plugins" from classpath and load plugins from them (this is the default behaviour).

bc. play.plugins.descriptor=conf/my-play-app.plugins
bc. play.plugins.descriptor=conf/prod.plugins,conf/test.plugins

Default: none.


h3(#play.bytecodeCache). play.bytecodeCache

Used to disable the bytecode cache in @dev@ mode; has no effect in @prod@ mode.

bc. play.bytecodeCache=false

Default: @true@


h3(#play.editor). play.editor

Open file from error pages. If your text editor supports opening files by URL, Play will dynamically link error pages to files. For Textmate, for example:

bc. play.editor=txmt://open?url=file://%s&line=%s


h3(#play.jobs.pool). play.jobs.pool

Size of the Jobs pool. For example:

bc. play.jobs.pool=20

Default: @10@


h3(#play.netty.clientAuth). play.netty.clientAuth

Configures @javax.net.ssl.SSLEngine@ client authentication. For example:

bc. play.netty.clientAuth=need

Values:

* @want@ - the server will _request_ client authentication
* @need@ - the server will _require_ client authentication
* @none@ - no client authentication

Default: @none@


h3(#play.netty.maxContentLength). play.netty.maxContentLength

HTTP server maximum content length for response streaming, in bytes.

Default: none - no maximum.


h3(#play.ssl.enabledCiphers). play.ssl.enabledCiphers

This setting allows to specify certain SSL ciphers to be used. This might be needed in case you have to be PCI compliant, as some ciphers in the default settings are vulnerable to the so-called BEAST attack.

bc. play.ssl.enabledCiphers=SSL_RSA_WITH_RC4_128_MD5,SSL_RSA_WITH_RC4_128_SHA

Default: none - the default ciphers are chosen.

h3(#play.ssl.enabledProtocols). play.ssl.enabledProtocols

This setting allows to specify certain SSL protocols to be used.

bc. play.ssl.enabledProtocols=TLSv1,TLSv1.1,TLSv1.2

Default: none - the default protocols are chosen.


h3(#play.pool). play.pool

Execution pool size. Try to keep this as low as possible. Setting this to 1 thread will serialise all requests (very useful for debugging purpose). For example:

bc. play.pool=10

Default: @1@ (in @dev@ mode), number of processors + 1 (in @prod@ mode).


h3(#play.templates.compile). play.templates.compile

The value is a list of files separated by a property like "@path.separator@":configuration#play.templates.compile.path.separator .

bc. play.templates.compile=/absolue/path/file.ext;conf/relative/path/file.ext;{module:reporting}module/relative/path/file.ext

The path notation of files can use:

* absolute file path
* relative file path
* module relative file path.

Default: no default the parameter is optional


h3(#play.templates.compile.path.separator). play.templates.compile.path.separator

Override the path separator for separating list elements of @play.templates.compile@":configuration#play.templates.compile .
This parameter would be usefull when using the path notation for module relative file path on unix systems,
where the default value would be @:@ . That would separate module prefix notations like @{module:modname}@ on unix.

bc. play.templates.compile.path.separator=;

Default: the system property @path.separator@


h3(#play.tmp). play.tmp

Folder used to store temporary files. For example:

bc. play.tmp=/tmp/play

Values:

* an absolute path
* a relative path, relative to the application directory
* @none@ so that no temporary directory will be used

Default: @tmp@


h2(#ssl). SSL

See also: "https.port":#https.port.


h3(#ssl.KeyManagerFactory.algorithm). ssl.KeyManagerFactory.algorithm

The standard name of a Java Secure Socket Extension (JSSE) trust management algorithm, for use with the "keystore.file":#keystore.file configuration.

bc. ssl.KeyManagerFactory.algorithm=SunX509

Default: @SunX509@

h2(#keystores). Custom key stores

Allows for custom SSL certificates to be used with connection initiated through WebServices

h3(#ssl.keyStore). ssl.Keystore

The custom keystore that should be added to Play! WebServices connections

h3(#ssl.keyStorePassword). ssl.keyStorePassword

The password neede to access the keys inside the keystore. This is required.

h3(#ssl.cavalidation). ssl.cavalidation

If set to true, the CA chain is validated upon connection.


h2(#trustmanager). trustmanager


h3(#trustmanager.algorithm). trustmanager.algorithm

A JDK Security API standard algorithm name, for use with "X509 certificates":#certificate and "keystore":#keystore configurations.

bc. trustmanager.algorithm=pkcs12

Values - ‘standard names’ from the JDK Security API:

* @jceks@ (‘SunJCE’ provider)
* @jks@ (‘SUN" provider)
* @pkcs12@

Default: @JKS@

bc. play.netty.clientAuth

Values 

* @want@ Controls whether accepted server-mode SSLSockets will be initially configured to request client authentication. 
* @need@ Controls whether accepted server-mode SSLSockets will be initially configured to require client authentication.
* @none@ None of the above

Default: @none@

h2(#upload). File upload

h3(#upload.threshold). upload.threshold

The threshold in bytes at which upload files will be written to disk, for @org.apache.commons.io.output.DeferredFileOutputStream@. For example:

bc. upload.threshold=20480

Default: @10240@

h3(#upload.maxRequestSize). upload.maxRequestSize

The maximum size permitted for the complete request. A value of -1 indicates no maximum.

bc. upload.maxRequestSize=2048

Default: @-1@

h3(#upload.maxFileSize). upload.maxFileSize

The maximum size permitted for a single uploaded file, as opposed to. A value of -1 indicates no maximum.

bc. upload.maxFileSize=1024

Default: @-1@

h2(#xforwarded). Proxy forwarding

h3(#XForwardedHost). XForwardedHost

Overrides the @X-Forwarded-Host@ HTTP header value - the original host requested by the client, for use with proxy servers.

Default: @X-Forwarded-Host@ HTTP header value.


h3(#XForwardedProto). XForwardedProto

Sets the proxy request to SSL, overriding the @X-Forwarded-Proto@ and @X-Forwarded-SSL@ HTTP header values - the protocol originally requested by the client. For example:

bc. XForwardedProto=https


h3(#XForwardedSupport). XForwardedSupport

A comma-separated list of IP addresses that are allowed @X-Forwarded-For@ HTTP request header values, used to restrict local addresses when an @X-Forwarded-For@ request header is set by a proxy server. Alternatively you can use 'ALL' if you do not want to restrict local addresses. **Note**: only use 'ALL' if you are very sure that if it safe to do so (e.g. you have a proper firewall in place that blocks public requests). A valid use-case would be when using Play! behind a Amazon ELB loadbalancer, which internal IP's tend to change over time.      

Default: @127.0.0.1@

h3(#XForwardedOverwriteDomainAndPort). XForwardedOverwriteDomainAndPort

Set to true to restore the request domain and port to original domain and port.

For example:

bc. XForwardedOverwriteDomainAndPort=true

Default: @false@

h2(#enhancers). Enhancers

h3(#play.propertiesEnhancer.enabled). play.propertiesEnhancer.enabled

Used to disable play enhancing of play class (can be used to switch off default constructors/getter/setter generation). For example:

bc. play.propertiesEnhancer.enabled=false

Default: @true@

h3(#play.propertiesEnhancer.generateAccessors). play.propertiesEnhancer.generateAccessors

Used to partially disable PropertyEnhancer. Namely, it switches off generating getters/setters and replacing 
all direct field accesses with getters/setters (which is the slowest part of "play precompile").
But it leaves generating default constructors.

For example:

bc. play.propertiesEnhancer.generateAccessors=false

Default: @true@
