h1. Play framework documentation

Welcome to the Play framework documentation. This documentaion is for the **1.0.3 release**, which differs from previous versions of the framework. Check the "version 1.0.3 release notes":releasenotes-1.0.3 for details.

p(note). This is a work in progress, feel free to ask any question not covered into these documents or report any errors. You can contribute to the documentation the "same way you can contribute code":faq.

<div id="searchBox"><form action="http://www.google.com/cse" id="cse-search-box"><div><input type="hidden" name="cx" value="002614023023983855063:jn1mu_7bof0" /><input type="hidden" name="ie" value="UTF-8" /><input type="text" name="q" size="31" style="font-size:14px"/> <input type="submit" name="sa" value="Search with google" style="font-size:14px"/></div></form><script type="text/javascript" src="http://www.google.com/coop/cse/brand?form=cse-search-box&lang=en"></script></div>

h2. <a name="started">Getting started</a>

Your first steps with Play and your first 5 minutes of fun.

# "Play framework overview":overview
# "Watch the screencast":http://vimeo.com/7087610
# "Five cool things you can do with Play":5things
# "Usability - details matter as much as features":usability
# "Frequently Asked Questions":faq
# "Installation guide":install
# "Your first application — the ‘Hello World’ tutorial":firstapp
# "Set up your preferred IDE":ide
# "Sample applications":samples
# "Live coding script - to practice, and impress your colleagues with":http://www.lunatech-research.fr/archives/2010/06/14/how-demo-play-framework-live-coding-script


h2. <a name="guide">Tutorial -- Play guide, a real world app step-by-step</a>

Learn Play by coding **‘Yet Another Blog Engine’**, from start to finish. Each chapter will be a chance to learn one more cool Play feature.

# "Starting up the project":guide1
# "A first iteration of the data model":guide2
# "Building the first screen":guide3
# "The comments page":guide4
# "Setting up a Captcha":guide5
# "Add tagging support":guide6
# "A basic admin area using CRUD":guide7
# "Adding authentication":guide8
# "Creating a custom editor area":guide9
# "Completing the application tests":guide10
# "Preparing for production":guide11
# "Internationalisation and localisation":guide12

h2. <a name="manual">The essential documentation</a>

Everything you need to know about Play.

# "Main concepts":main
## "The MVC application model":main#mvc
## "A request life cycle":main#request
## "Application layout & organization":main#application
## "Development life cycle":main#lifecycle
# "HTTP routing":routes
## "About REST":routes#rest
## "The routes file syntax":routes#syntax
## "Routes priority":routes#priority
## "Serving static resources":routes#static
## "Reverse routing: generate some URL":routes#reverse
## "Setting content types":routes#content-types
## "Content negotiation":routes#content-negotiation
# "Controllers":controllers
## "Controller overview":controllers#overview
## "Retrieving HTTP parameters":controllers#params
## "Advanced HTTP to Java binding":controllers#binding
## "JPA object binding":controllers#objectbinding
## "Result types":controllers#result
## "Interceptions":controllers#interceptions
## "Session and Flash scopes":controllers#session
# "The template engine":templates
## "Template syntax":templates#syntax
## "Template inheritance":templates#inheritance
## "Custom tags":templates#tags
## "Java template extensions":templates#extensions
## "Implicit objects available in a template":templates#implicits
# "The domain object model":model
## "Properties simulation":model#properties
## "Set-up a database to persist your model objects":model#database
## "Persist your object model with Hibernate":model#hibernate
## "The stateless model":model#stateless
# "A little asynchronism using jobs":jobs
## "Bootstrap jobs":jobs#concepts
## "Scheduled jobs":jobs#scheduling
## "Suspendable requests":jobs#suspendable
# "Testing the application":test
## "Writing tests":test#writing
## "Fixtures":test#fixtures
## "Running the tests":test#running
## "Continuous integration":test#continuous
# "Deployment options":deployment
## "Standalone Play application":deployment#standalone
## "Running on JEE application servers":deployment#appservers
## "Google Application Engine (GAE)":deployment#gae
## "Stax cloud hosting platform":deployment#stax


h2. <a name="cook">Cookbook</a>

Tips about everything and anything.

# "Play modules, and the modules repository":modules
# "Security guide":security
# "JPA support":jpa
# "Validating HTTP data":validation
# "Logging configuration":logs
# "Manage application.conf in several environments":ids
# "Internationalisation guide":i18n
# "Cache and Memcached configuration":cache
# "Putting your application in production":production
# "Sending e-mail":emails
# "OpenID integration":openid
# "Ajax with JQuery":ajax
# "YAML":yaml

h2. <a name="modules">Standard modules</a>

These optional modules are included with the standard distribution. "More modules":http://www.playframework.org/modules.

# "CRUD":crud
# "Secure":secure

h2. <a name="references">Reference documentation</a>

Extended references for day-to-day hacking.

# "API documentation (Javadoc)":/@api/index.html
# "Template tags":tags
# "Java extensions":javaextensions
# "Built-in validations":validation-builtin
# "The missing cheat sheet":http://download.playframework.org/miscellaneous/play-cheat-sheet.pdf


h2. <a name="versionnotes">Version notes</a>

New versions of Play include certain changes.

# "Play 1.0.3":releasenotes-1.0.3
# "Play 1.0.2":releasenotes-1.0.2
# "Play 1.0.1":releasenotes-1.0.1
