h1. Installation guide


h2. <a>Prerequisites</a>

To run the play framework, you will need "Java 5 or later":http:java.sun.com. If you wish to build play from source, you will need the "Bazaar source control client":http:bazaar-vcs.org/ to fetch the source code and "Ant":http:ant.apache.org/ to build it.


h2. <a>Download Binary package</a>

Download the latest "play binary package":http:www.playframework.org/download and extract the archive. Add the framework installation directory to your system PATH. If you're on UNIX, make sure that the _play_ script is runnable (otherwise simply do a **chmod +x play**). That's all.

p(note). *Tip*
 
If you need to rebuild the framework for whatever reason, cd into the *$PLAY_HOME/framework* directory and run *ant*.


h2. <a>Build from latest sources</a>

To benefit from the latest improvements and bug fixes, you may want to compile play from sources. You'll need a "Bazaar client":http:bazaar-vcs.org/Download to fetch the sources and "Ant":http:ant.apache.org/ to build the framework.

From the command line :

bc. # bzr checkout lp:play
# cd play/framework
# ant

Play! is ready to use.

p(note). lp:play aliases to http:bazaar.launchpad.net/%7Eplay-developers/play/stable3-hacks/


h2. <a>Use the play command</a>

When the framework is correctly installed, open a shell and execute *play*. 

bc. # play

You should see the play help :

!images/help!


h3. Arguments

The play command line tool takes two arguments :

bc. # play command path

where command is one of the following :

* **new** : Create a new application in the path directory.
* **run** : Start an existing application in the path directory.
* **start** : Start an existing application in the path directory. (start in background)
* **stop** : Stop an existing application in the path directory. (if it was started in background)
* **restart** : Restart an existing application in the path directory. (start in background)
* **pid** : Display the PID of the currently running application in path. (if it was started in background)
* **out** : Display the system.out file of the application in the path directory
* **war** : Export the application in a standalone WAR package
* **test** : Run the application in test mode
* **auto-test**: Run the application in test mode and automatically launch all tests
* **eclipsify** : Generation configuration files for eclipse IDE
* **netbeansify** : Generation configuration files for netbeans IDE
* **secret** : Generate a new secret key for the application.

p(note). **Note**
 
If the path argument is omitted, the current directory is used as default path.


h2. <a>Create a new application</a>

Use the **new** command to create a new application. You must give a non existant path where the application will be created.

bc. # play new myApp

!images/empty!

Will create a new application. Start it with : 

bc. # play run myApp

You can then open a browser at "http:localhost:9000":http:localhost:9000 and see the default page for the application.

!images/newapp!

p(note). **Your Play! environnement is ready**
 
See how to "set up your preferred IDE":ide.
