h1. Router module

The router module allows you to embed your "routes":routes inside the controller. It provides a set of annotations to declare your "routes":routes next to your controller methods.

The following annotations are supported at method level:

* **@Post**
* **@Put**
* **@Get**
* **@Delete**
* **@Head**
* **@Any**

These annotations have the following attributes:

* **value**: the path to access your controller's method
* **priority** (optional): the priority of the route (lower number is higher priority)
* **params** (optional) 

**@Any** matches all the above HTTP methods.

p(note). Note that the path uses the same format described in "HTTP routing":routes

Examples:

bc. @Get("/emails/{<.*>folderNames}/{messageId}")
public static void email(@Bind(separator = "/")String[] folderNames, int messageId) throws Exception {
   ...
}

bc.  @Post("/login")
public static void authenticate(String username, String password) throws Exception {
   ...
}

The following annotations are supported at class level:

* **@ServeStatic**
* **@StaticRoutes**

@ServeStatic indicates content that need to be served statically. It has the following attributes:

* **value**: The path to access the content
* **directory**: the directory you want to access inside the Play! application
* **priority** (optional): the priority of the route (lower number is higher priority)

@StaticRoutes allows to define multiple @ServeStatic routes.

Examples:

bc. @ServeStatic(value = "/public/", directory = "public")
public class Application extends Controller { 
   ...
}

bc. @StaticRoutes({
    @ServeStatic(value = "/public/", directory = "public"),
    @ServeStatic(value = "/images/", directory = "images")
})
public class Application extends Controller { 
   ...
}


p(note). Be sure to empty the "routes" file to avoid any conflicting routes.

h2. <a>Enable the router module for the application</a>

In the **/conf/application.conf** file, enable the router module by adding this line:

bc. # The router module
module.router=${play.path}/modules/router

