h1. Built-in validations

Play defines several built-in validations, each of which is used as described in the "validation":validation chapter.

Each validation has an associated error message, defined in @$PLAY_HOME/resources/messages@, whose key is @validation.@ followed by the validation name. You can override this message by using the same key in your application's @conf/messages@ file, and localise it using message files for other languages.

<h2><a name="email">email</a></h2>

Checks that the value is a valid e-mail address.

bc. validation.email(address);

Annotation syntax:

bc. @Email String address

Message key: @validation.email@

<h2><a name="equals">equals</a></h2>

Checks that the value is equal to another parameter's value, using the value's @equals@ method, e.g. for checking for a password confirmation field.

bc. validation.equals(password, passwordConfirmation);

Annotation syntax:

bc. @Equals("passwordConfirmation") String password

Message key: @validation.equals@

<h2><a name="future">future</a></h2>

Checks that the value is a date in the future. If a second date is specified as a reference, then the value must be in the future with respect to the reference date - i.e. after it.

bc. validation.future(dueDate);
validation.future(dueDate, shipmentDate);

Annotation syntax:

bc. @InFuture String dueDate
@InFuture("1979-12-31") String birthDate

Message key: @validation.future@

<h2><a name="ipv4Address">ipv4Address</a></h2>

Checks that the value is an IP address that complies with the version 4 protocol; empty strings are considered valid.

bc. validation.ipv4Address(value);

Annotation syntax:

bc. @IPv4Address String ip

Message key: @validation.ipv4@

<h2><a name="ipv6Address">ipv6Address</a></h2>

Checks that the value is an IP address that complies with the version 6 protocol; empty strings are considered valid.

bc. validation.ipv6Address(value);

Annotation syntax:

bc. @IPv6Address String ip

Message key: @validation.ipv6@

<h2><a name="isTrue">isTrue</a></h2>

Checks that the value is a @String@ or @Boolean@ that evaluates to @true@, e.g. for an 'I agree to the terms' checkbox that must be checked, or a non-zero @Number@. Null values are considered false/invalid.

bc. validation.isTrue(agree);

Annotation syntax:

bc. @IsTrue String agree

Message key: @validation.isTrue@

<h2><a name="match">match</a></h2>

Checks that the value is a string that matches the given regular expression. Empty strings are considered valid.

bc. validation.match(abbreviation, "[A-Z]{3}"); // TLA

Annotation syntax:

bc. @Match("[A-Z]{3}") String abbreviation

Message key: @validation.match@

<h2><a name="max">max</a></h2>

Checks that the value is a @String@ or @Number@ that is no greater than the given number. Null values are considered valid.

bc. validation.max(wordCount, 7500); // Short story

Annotation syntax:

bc. @Max(7500) String wordCount

Message key: @validation.max@

<h2><a name="maxSize">maxSize</a></h2>

Checks that the value is a @String@ whose length is no greater than the given length. Empty strings are considered valid.

bc. validation.maxSize(url, 2083); // IE 4.0 - 8

Annotation syntax:

bc. @MaxSize(2083) String value

Message key: @validation.maxSize@

<h2><a name="min">min</a></h2>

Checks that the value is a @String@ or @Number@ that is no less than the given number. Null values are considered valid.

bc. validation.min(age, 18); // Adult

Annotation syntax:

bc. @Min(18) Long age

Message key: @validation.min@

<h2><a name="minSize">minSize</a></h2>

Checks that the value is a @String@ whose length is no less than the given length. Empty strings are considered valid.

bc. validation.minSize(value, 42);

Annotation syntax:

bc. @MinSize(42) String value

Message key: @validation.minSize@

<h2><a name="past">past</a></h2>

Checks that the value is a date in the past. If a second date is specified as a reference, then the value must be in the past with respect to the reference date - i.e. before it.

bc. validation.past(actualDepartureDate);
validation.past(expectedDepartureDate, expectedArrivalDate);

Annotation syntax:

bc. @InPast String actualDepartureDate
@InPast("1980-01-01") String birthDate

Message key: @validation.past@

<h2><a name="phone">phone</a></h2>

Checks that the value is a valid phone number; empty strings are considered valid. The validation is relaxed and is intented to enforce a basic phone pattern. Please implement your own @Match for country specific validations.

bc. validation.phone(value);

Annotation syntax:

bc. @Phone String phone

Message key: @validation.phone@

Format: @+CCC (SSSSSS)9999999999xEEEE@
 
* @+@          optional country code mark
* @CCC@        optional country code, up to 3 digits, note than it MUST be followed be a delimiter
* @(SSSSSS)@   optional subzone, up to 6 digits
* @9999999999@ mandatory number, up to 20 digits (which should cover all know cases current and future)
* @x@          optional extension, can also be spelled "ext" or "extension"
* @EEEE@       optional extension number, up to 4 digits
* Delimiters can be either a _space_, @-@, @.@ or @/@ and can be used anywhere in the number
  
Examples:

* @usa:(305) 613 09 58 ext 101@
* @france:+33 1 47 37 62 24 x3@
* @germany:+49-4312 / 777 777@
* @china:+86 (10)69445464@
* @uk:(020) 1234 1234@

<h2><a name="range">range</a></h2>

Checks that the value is a number within the range (inclusive) specified by the two given numbers.

bc. validation.range(wordCount, 17500, 40000); // Novella

Annotation syntax:

bc. @Range(min = 17500, max = 40000) String wordCount

Message key: @validation.range@

<h2><a name="required">required</a></h2>

Checks that the value is a non-empty @String@, @Collection@, @File@ or array.

bc. validation.required(value);

Annotation syntax:

bc. @Required String value

Message key: @validation.required@

<h2><a name="unique">unique</a></h2>

Checks that the value of the column which has the annotation is unique, by querying the database. (This only works with JPA.) You can define additional columns as a comma-separated list of annotation values. So annotating a property called @c@ with <code>@Unique("a, b")</code> will check that the combination of the values of properties @a@, @b@ and @c@ is unique.   

Annotation syntax:

bc. @Unique(additionalColumns) String productCode
@Unique("postCode") String houseNumber

Message key: @validation.unique@

<h2><a name="url">url</a></h2>

Checks that the value is a valid URL; empty strings are considered valid. Note that not all valid URLs (as defined by RFC 1738) are accepted; only URLs with an @http@, @https@ or @ftp@ scheme are considered valid.

bc. validation.url(value);

Annotation syntax:

bc. @URL String address

Message key: @validation.url@

