h1. IMPORTANT: READ ME

This is a special branch of a fork of the Play! Framework with fixes that haven't been merged upstream yet. The following fixes
are included:

- Support for composite keys in JPA
- Show stack traces in test output
- Bug fix for test stack traces
- Bug fix for packages-info.java
- Made test-runner menu fixed at the top (for easier scrolling)
- Made user TypeBinders higher priority than the default ones (so they can be overridden)
- Added possibility to reset the Mail.Mock (so each test can start with a fresh mock)
- Display worker count on startup
- Display warning when workers are exhausted and jobs are pooled

Since this branch intends to be kept in sync with upstream, it will frequently be _rebased_ so if you intend to _pull_ from it,
be warned that history will be rewritten. 

h1. Welcome to Play framework

Play framework makes it easier to build Web applications with Java. It is a clean alternative to bloated Enterprise Java stacks. It focuses on developer productivity and targets RESTful architectures. Play is a perfect companion to agile software development.

Learn more on the "http://www.playframework.org":http://www.playframework.org website.

h2. Getting started

1. Install the latest version of Play framework and unzip it anywhere you want:

bc. unzip play-1.1.zip -d /opt/play-1.1

2. Add the **play** script to your PATH:

bc. export PATH=$PATH:/opt/play-1.1

3. Create a new Play application:

bc. play new /opt/myFirstApp

4. Run the created application:

bc. play run /opt/myFirstApp

5. Go to "localhost:9000/":http://localhost:9000 and you’ll see the welcome page.

6. Start developing your new application:

* "Your first application — the ‘Hello World’ tutorial":http://www.playframework.org/documentation/1.1/firstapp
* "Tutorial — Play guide, a real world app step-by-step":http://www.playframework.org/documentation/1.1/guide1
* "The essential documentation":http://www.playframework.org/documentation/1.0.3/main
* "Java API":http://www.playframework.org/@api/index.html

h2. Get the source

Fork the project source code on "Github":http://github.com/playframework/play:

bc. git clone git://github.com/playframework/play.git

The project history is pretty big. You can pull only a shallow clone by specifying the number of commits you want with **--depth**:

bc.  git clone git://github.com/playframework/play.git --depth 10

h2. Reporting bugs

Please report bugs on "our lighthouse tracker":http://play.lighthouseapp.com/projects/57987-play-framework.

h2. Licence

Play framework is distributed under "Apache 2 licence":http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html.