h1. Setting up i18n

Internationalization is a means of adapting your application to different languages and allow for regional differences. Follow theses steps to enable internationalization in your application.

h2. <a>Only use UTF-8!</a>

play supports only one encoding : UTF-8. Since encoding problems can be weird and difficult to deal with, we made the choice to support only one encoding. UTF-8 allows you to display all characters for all languages.

So be sure to be consistent with UTF-8 usage throughout your application:

* Edit all your source files as UTF-8
* Define proper encoding headers in HTTP
* Set your HTML meta tags to UTF-8
* If you use a database, configure it to use UTF-8, and always connect to it using UTF-8

p(note). **Note**
 
The UTF-8 encoding issue is the reason why most of the play configuration files, even though they are Java properties files, are not named *.properties. Java imposes the requirement that properties files must be encoded with **iso-8859-1**. play configuration files must be UTF-8 encoded. Need we way more?

h2. <a>Externalize your messages</a>

To support i18n you have to externalize all messages in the application. 

Create a file named **messages** in the **conf/** directory of the application. This file is really just a Java properties file.

bc. hello=Hello !
back=Back

Then you can define a specific **message** file for each language used in your application. Just add the ISO language code as file extension. 

For example, the message file containing the corresponding French translations in **conf/messages.fr** :

bc. hello=Bonjour !
back=Retour

h2. <a>Define languages supported by the application</a>

In the **conf/application.conf** file define a list of supported languages.

bc. application.langs=fr,en,ja

On the first request from a new user, play will guess the default language to use. It does so by parsing the HTTP **Accept-language** header. It will then save the chosen language in a **PLAY_LANG** cookie. So the next request will use the same language.

From your application code your can retrieve the current language for the user by accessing the **play.i18n.Lang** object :

bc. String lang = Lang.get();

If you want to permanently change the user language, use the change method :

bc. Lang.change("ja");

The new value will be saved back in the user's language Cookie.

h2. Retrieve localized messages

From application code, you can retrieve messages defined in message files. From Java, use the **play.i18n.Messages** object.

bc. public static void hello() {
    renderText(Messages.get("hello"));
}

We support message formatting through the standard Java formatting syntax. You can also define dynamic content in your messages :

bc. hello=Hello %s !

and

bc. public static void hello(String user) {
    renderText(Messages.get("hello", user));
}

From a template you can use the special **&{...}** syntax to display localized messages :

bc. <h1>&{'hello'}</h1>

or using dynamic content

bc. <h1>&{'hello', params.user}</h1>
